A Vision of Future Accessible Mobile Technology

Author:	Robert Dodd MSc.
E-mail:		r.dodd@tees.ac.uk
Institution:	Special Needs Computing Research Unit, School of Computing, University of Teesside
Abstract:
Advances in pervasive and mobile computing are promoting a trend away from the traditional desktop PC towards a world of multiple, casually accessible, mobile computing devices. Such devices are characterised by specialisation, collaboration, and context; specialisation in the application of each device, collaboration in the sharing of information between devices and their environment, context in the understanding of their immediate environment. The manner of how such mobile devices are both constructed and used has important ethical implications if we wish to live in an inclusive society, and in particular, how we make such devices accessible to all needs to be addressed. By considering potential uses of mobile technology in daily life, in the workplace, and in education, and by addressing user need rather than existing application, we can develop through allegory and metaphor, a model of ubiquitous and pervasive mobile technology in which to explore individual aspects of accessibility. Each element of the model is mapped to recent research projects in mobile telephony, wearable computing, and robotics, in order to allow discussion of the implications of that particular technology for accessibility. The emphasis is not so much on existing technologies and applications, as on emerging technologies and how they can be harnessed to the social, educational and employment needs of users with disabilities. In this context, a view of the future of accessible mobile technology over the next ten years is offered for consideration. This vision of mobile technology promotes the concept of devices which embrace the intrinsic characteristics of specialisation, collaboration, and context, rather than considering accessibility and assistive technology as something added, or bolted-on to ‘normal’ mobile devices. Accessibility becomes inherent within the very fabric of the mobile device.

