Overview
The Assessment Scenario 
John, an undergraduate student, is experiencing problems using computing equipment necessary for his course and approaches the university’s support services for help. They arrange for John’s computing needs to be assessed. Through a combination of questionnaire and interview, a number of possible solutions are identified for John to personally evaluate and select from.  When doing so, he discovers that with additional hardware and software he can successfully use a personal computer to the level necessary for his course work, but that mobile computing is still a problem for him and he will sometimes require a paper-based solution for use in fieldwork. 
Defining Accessibility
One of the most interesting aspects of the discipline of accessibility is the difficulty faced when defining the term “accessibility”. A possible starting definition would be to say:
1.2.1	An entity is accessible if all people who need to interact with the entity can do so effectively for a given a time and place. 
The word “entity” appears in the definition because of the number of different contexts in which people interact with their environment, both physically and intellectually. Entity is a  sufficiently general terms that it may embrace all contexts, although in terms of this Ph.D., it is the interaction with computer software that is of primary interest.
The problem with the above definition in the details surround that context: it is very difficult to define an ontology for accessibility such that it accurately and precisely covers all aspects of the built environment, all aspects of access to goods and services, and all aspects of timely access to content available through human-computer interaction; Consequently, the ontology surrounding the term “accessibility” is entirely context dependent. 

So, in choosing the accessibility context for a case such as the assessment scenario in Section  1.1, a number of questions need to be considered:
1)	What are the problems that John faces? Are they ones of timely access to content, or ones of participation in a collegiate environment, or both?
2)	Are the problems that John faces a problem of accessibility, or of usability? 
3)	Is the medium of John’s problems tangible or intangible?
4)	How much of the original “problem” computing technology must still exist in the solution to John’s problems, for the solution to be called accessible?
5)	Can John’s computing needs, and the identified solutions, be generalized to relate to groups or classes of computing user?
Question (1) demonstrates the problem in scoping accessibility problems. Delivery of content is largely a technical problem based upon ensuring that appropriate interaction modalities exist between user and content for  the user’s physical and cognitive skills in that environment. If the question is one of validity, in ensuring that all students on a course experience the same learning outcomes, and if John's course uses say, discussion boards in a Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) such as Blackboard [x] to provide support to students outside of normal teaching hours, then any solution becomes substantially more complex than simple substitution of content; substitution of electronic content on the VLE with paper copy arguably provides accessibility of existing content for John, but only solutions that would allow John to be involved in the discussions occurring on the VLE are likely to be considered accessible in that context.
Question (2) relates to user experience when interacting with mechanical and electronic devices. Substitution of the electronic version of Encyclopaedia Britannica [x] with the paper version may conceivably resolve some of John’s problems with his course, but the quality of that user experience varies in terms of: speed of access; restrictions on physical location of the paper copy; and the search tools available to find, collate, and follow content within the encyclopaedia. Yes, John has gained access to content, but the usability of the content is worse for him than for a student able to use the electronic version. Similarly, it may be technically possible to provide John with access to the VLE, but that does not mean his user experience is guaranteed to be as good as that of his cohort. What the above definition of accessibility merely requires, is that any interaction is effective for that time and place, and not equivalent to that experienced by others. The question that arises as a result is: what is the difference between an effective interaction and an equivalent experience? And are either measurable?
Question (3) relates to the characteristics of the media through which John communicates with computing devices. There are tangible, physical aspects to those media, for example: mechanical buttons; digital displays; and device surfaces and textures. There are also more intangible characteristics to consider, for example information and understanding can come from relative positioning of content within, to use Nesbitt’s [x] term, a spatial substrate, and its temporal encoding. Another important intangible characteristic is the availability of interaction modalities for the given media in a particular context. Even if John has some capacity to interact with tangible elements of a device, use of a standard graphical user interface may be beyond his capabilities if the bandwidth for communication between John and the interface is too low.
Question (4) relates to how we perceive accessibility in particular contexts, and legal frameworks that support that perception. Potential accessibility solutions to John’s problems break down into three categories: substitution; augmentation; and alteration. Substitution, for example of paper content for electronic content as discussed earlier is a potential solution for John, but it would not necessarily be a solution in the USA if content was being supplied online by a government agency; Section 508 of the Americans with Disabilities Act [x] defines minimum accessibility requirements for electronic content supplied by government and its agencies. That is not to say that substitution cannot be offered, but that steps must be taken to broaden access to the electronic content. So, for legal reasons, an accessibility solution for John in the UK, may not be a solution for John in the USA.
Question (5) relates to the way accessibility as a discipline considers user need.  In commercial programs such as Microsoft Windows XP [x], the user is invited to self-identify as disabled (the accessibility options require selection using a button drawn as a wheelchair icon) and is presented with possible adaptations to the default interaction modalities; these options are grouped around the communications media supported by the application namely: keyboard; sound; display; mouse. Those options allow for adaptation and augmentation within individual design spaces, and synchronized duplication of information across design spaces. Similarly, Web browsing using applications such as Microsoft Internet Explorer [x], accessibility is considered in terms of pre-defined adaptations of the standard browser interaction modalities.  This grouping-by-media approach is also taken in education, notably by the Access for All initiative [x], and the follow-on work by the Dublin Core Accessibility Working Group [x], and ISO 24751 [x]  content in characterized in terms of available substitutions, augmentations, and adaptations to course material, and more generally to documents.  All of these examples in some way make assumptions about a user’s capability to operate in particular circumstances, either implicitly in the choices offered to the user, or more explicitly in the case of ISO 24751,  through use of user profiles. In John’s case however, user profiling is likely to be more explicit with a formal or semi-formal assessment of his physical capabilities by a member of the university staff, with that assessment leading to a trial-and-error experimentation with specific assistive technology available within the university setting for the specific equipment used. 
To summarize, accessibility as a term depends entirely upon the context of its use. The related ontology, measures, and solutions enabling accessibility, depend upon the perception of the problem to be solved, and any legal framework associated with that context. They also depend upon a product designer’s perception of a user’s capability to operate within the supported media and related interaction modalities for the given context. Different perceptions of capability and user need lead to different offered solutions.
Given such a contextual focus in accessibility definitions, the definition of accessibility given in Section 1.2.1 was re-worked to form the thesis of this Ph.D.  The re-working highlighted the transient nature of the encounter between user and entity (repeated below for convenience). In doing so, it also removed the loaded and formally undefined term, “effectively”, and instead simply declared accessibility to have “measurable and quantitative properties”. The modelling of that encounter, and a consideration of measurability of the encounter, became the Ph.D.

1.3.1 	Accessibility is the outcome of the encounter between an entity’s capacity to interact and its users physical and cognitive capabilities with capacity, capability, and accessibility all expressed as measurable and quantitative properties.
Methodology
One of the  key assertions of Section 1.3.1 is that the accessibility issues of the encounter between user and entity are expressible as measurable and quantitative properties.  That assertion follows from the simple observation that some user interfaces work better for some people than for others.
 If the assertion is true, then some measurement must exist, either quantitative or qualitative, that can rank the accessibility of a user interface for a specific individual; this is what John's needs assessment in Section 1.1 relies upon. The assertion however, is even more specific, and states that accessibility can be described in terms quantitative properties. This research is, in large measure, a search for, and an investigation into, those quantitative properties.
The search for the quantitative properties focusses on the capabilities of the user and the capacity of the interface to support those specific capabilities, following hypothesis 1.4.1 (repeated below for convenience).
1.4.1	The general case of the encounter between an entity’s capacity to interact and its users physical and cognitive capabilities is capable of expression through a framework of relational models.
Hypothesis 1.4.1 takes a systems modelling view of capacity and capability, viewing both capacity and capability as a collection of related concepts. In such a view, the concepts have unique characteristics, that is properties, associated with them. If appropriate concepts and characteristics can be found for both capacity and capability, then perhaps the relationships between characteristics of concepts of capability, and the characteristics of concepts of capability, are identifiable and measurable. If so, then these measurable relationships are potentially the quantitative properties of accessibility.
Given that the search for quantitative properties appeared to be an investigation of a relational model, then the appropriate method to investigate the properties is systems analysis. Based on commercial experience, the chosen method for the research was the Shlaer-Mellor object oriented analysis and design method [x].  Shlaer-Mellor is unique in its analysis approach in that it decomposes problems into separate (object oriented) relational models, and explicitly describes systems in terms of the specific populations of of each model, and the relationships between them. As such, it is  perfect fit for hypothesis 1.4.1.
The Shlaer-Mellor method is targeted at the production of executable computer programs, rather purely an analysis or thinking tool. It also has a rich set of diagrams and associated semantics. Chapter 3 (Methodology) discusses in detail how the method in terms of both process and semantics, may be used to model the framework of relational models of hypothesis 1.4.1.
Users

Devices

Context

Content

Adaptation

Conclusion

References

