Educational Research Online: E-Learning Sequences analyzed by means of Optimal-Matching

The overall potential of hypertext is widely discussed since the work of the early hypertext-pioneers Bush (1945), Engelbart (1963) and Nelson (1965). Especially since the draft by Berners-Lee / Cailliau (1990) and its implementation the main characteristic of the WWW is located in its non-linear structure. Based on this structure a specific way of usage is deduced, which is summarized by the nautical metaphor of „navigation“. This metaphor breakes ground for a multitude of hypotheses about learning processes based on the navigation in such non-linear structures. From a temporal point of view the exploratory navigation in an online learning environment is the linear unfolding of a non-linear hypertext (see Kuhlen 1991, p. 33). Exactly this unfolding is pronounced by characterizing hypertext as a pull-medium. By selecting specific links from a multitude of possible links, a navigational sequence or path is established. On this account hypertextual learning environments are referred to as multilinear or multisequential (see Landow, 1997). Supposing the hypertext is a learning environment and the usage aims at learning, the process of navigation can be taken as e-learning. The multiplicity of hypotheses about navigational processes and especially about processes of e-learning conflicts with a general lack of methodology for empirical analysis. Therefore in general the results of e-learning are focused. The analysis of navigation from a process-related point of view is a blind spot in current research: What do concrete processes of navigation in hypertextual learning environments look like? On which methodological basis these navigational processes can be analyzed? How can patterns, regularities and structures of navigational processes be identified? At its heart these questions aim at a methodology for analyzing sequences. To answer these questions the method of analyzing navigational sequences by means of optimal-matching is described in this proposal. Then the analysis of aggregated is discriminated from the analysis of sequenced logdata. From an educational point of view the process of exploratory navigation is described as autodidactic. Finally the potential of the proposed methodology is pointed out.
Aggregated and sequenced log file data
As a general rule the interaction of users with online environments is recorded by server-sided log files. The log file data represent a specific way to document and transcribe navigational processes: the succession of visited pages (i.e. transferred elements) is translated to a digital text file, it is transcribed by a defined algorithm (i.e. using the apache log file format). This transcription represents a formal log of the reactions of a webserver, which is generated and documented automatically as a way of passive logging. As a specific potential, Priemer [Pr04] describes the process of collecting log file data as unobtrusive, detailed, objective, non-reactive and emphasis that logdata refers to the action of users in authentic  situations (Webb, Campbel; Schwartz; Sechrest 1966). How can this logdata can be analyzed? In general the analysis of aggregated logdata can be discriminated from the analysis of sequenced logdata. The analysis of aggregated logdata is a well known approach to analyze the usage of online-environments. Many providers make these aggregated usage data available to their customers. The term „aggregated“ refers to the fact that the logdata information is first merged and then ratios of average usage are calculated (i.e. average time of usage, average number of page views, average number of hits). Thereby the descriptive-statistical analysis is focused, which is basically oriented at a cross-sectional design of data collection. In contrast the basic analytical unit of sequenced logdata are navigational sequences as process oriented data, I.e. these sequences refer to visited pages of online-environments. These sequences contain information about the temporal process, which are lost while aggregation. Main characteristic of these process data is the orientation at a longitudinal design of data collection and analysis: data is repeatedly collected in defined temporal intervals on identical users. Whereas sequenced logdata allows the analysis of the development of navigational processes, this analysis is basically not possible using aggregated logdata (see Iske / Swertz 2005).
Analysis of navigational sequences by means of optimal-matching
In general the term sequence is defined as an order or succession of elements. In the field of natural sciences and in particular in the field of molecular biology human DNA can be considered as the prototype of a sequence. In the field of sociology the prototype of a sequence is the life course (see Erzberger 2001; Sackmann / Wingens 2001). Concerning the analysis of e-learning the prototype of a sequence is the navigational path through an online learning environment. This navigational sequence is based on the temporal succession of visited informational units as its elements. From a technical point of view these navigational sequences are recorded by server-sided log file data, which documents the usage of the learning environment. Based on this electronic process data (see Bergmann / Meyer 2000) the navigational paths of different users in the learning environment can be reconstructed. These navigational sequences constitute the starting point of sequence analysis by means of optimal-matching. The optimal-matching algorithm is one specific approach to sequence analysis, which in comparison to other disciplines represents a relatively novel approach in social sciences. The overall aim of optimal-matching is the analysis of a huge number of complex and long sequences in order to identify patterns, structures and regularities. The transfer of this method from the field of natural sciences (see Sankoff / Kruskal 1983) into the field of social sciences – and especially into the field of sociology – can be traced back to  Abbott (see Abbott / Forrest 1986), whose research since the end of the 1980ies is widely regarded as cutting-edge (see Aisenbrey 2001: 43 and Halpin / Chan 1998). So far in pedagogical research and in particular in the analysis of e-learning there is no systematic application of optimal-matching in order to analyze navigational sequences. The starting point of optimal-matching analysis is the question of how to determine similarity of sequences: How can similarity of sequences can be detected at all? How can the degree of similarity be detected? In the following two fundamentally different answers are described: Hamming-Distance and Levenshtein-Distance. The concept of hamming-distance (Hamming 1950) originates from the field of electronic data transfer and is a widespread method to control errors in data transfer. Both posted and received data sequences are compared position by position in consideration of identical elements. The result of this comparison is a value which is called Hamming-Distance. In case of maximum similarity every element in every single position of the compared sequences is identical (i.e. the compared sequences are identical). In case of a maximum dissimilarity no element in no position is identical. The appropriateness of the Hamming-Distance ends when it is used beyond error control and furthermore in domains, where an inherent correspondence of positions can't be postulated and where sequences of different length are to be compared. So for analyzing navigational sequences a more sophisticated approach is required. In order to identify patterns, structures and regularities in sequences by means of optimal-matching, every sequence of the dataset is compared to every other sequence: the sequences of the data set are compared pairwise. The distance of two sequences as the degree of dissimilarity is determined depending on the number of operations to achieve an alignment of origin and target sequence. The fewer operations are necessary to transform the origin sequence to reach an alignment with the target sequence, the more similar are the two sequences. The more operations are needed to transform the origin sequence to reach an alignment with the target sequence, the more dissimilar are the two sequences. The transformations are based upon three fundamental operations: insertion, deletion and substitution. The described method is called optimal-matching and is based on two distinct algorithms (see Kruskal 1983): First the detection of all operations to reach an alignment of origin and target sequence („alignment analysis“). Second the detection of the lowest number of required operations („optimum analysis“). This lowest number of required operations is used as a value to indicate the degree of dissimilarity of sequences and is called Levenshtein-Distance (Levenshtein 1966). 
The following example demonstrates the detection of the Levenshtein-Distance using a dataset of three sequences (see figure 1 - 3). In figure 1 the pairwise comparison of sequence 1 and sequence 2 is shown: Initially the first element „A“ of the origin sequence is deleted, then an element „A“ is inserted. Thus minimal two operations are required for alignment. Figure 2 shows the pairwise comparison of sequence 1 and sequence 3: Initially an element „G“ is inserted at the first position of the origin sequence. For this reason all following elements are moved. Thus minimal one operation is required for alignment. In contrast to Hamming-Distance, which detects a maximum dissimilarity for this case, optimal-matching detects these two sequences as similar. Based on the fundamental operations the algorithm is able to identify the inherent pattern of sequence 1 and sequence 2. In short: origin and target sequence are shifted by one position i.e. by one element. Figure 3 shows the pairwise comparison of sequence 2 and sequence 3: Initially an element „G“ is inserted in the origin sequence. Then element „B“ is deleted and another element „B“ is inserted. Thus minimal three operations are required for alignment.
The result of the pairwise comparison of all sequences of the dataset is documented as a distance-matrix, which contains the levenshtein-distance of every pairwise comparison. This levenshtein-matrix as a result of the optimal-matching analysis provides the starting point of either exploratory-heuristic or confirmatory research strategies (see Kruskal 1999, S. 31). Both strategies go directly back to the Levenshtein-Distance matrix, but in different ways: A confirmatory research strategy allows to confront theoretical models as prototypical or reference sequences with empirical  sequences (see Erzberger 2001, Chan 1995). In this way the empirical existence of theoretical models (i.e. pedagogical patterns) can be analyzed. A exploratory-heuristic research strategy allows to analyze empirical sequences without using theoretical models or reference sequences. First empirical sequences are compared pairwise with regard to levenshtein-distance. Based on the Levenshtein-Distance matrix sequences are subsumed to homogeneous groups by means of cluster analysis.
According to Erzberger (2001) the exploratory-heuristic sequence analysis by means of optimal-matching can be characterized as a case-oriented strategy, where sequence as complete courses and as complete course histories are considered in full complexity and variety. Not until the consideration of a great many number of sequences patterns, structures and regularities are at all identifiable: „Structure emerges from the synopsis of all courses“ (Erzberger 2001, S. 36; translation S.I.). The analysis of navigational sequences as an exploratory-heuristic approach allows the identification of typical patterns in empirical sequences which arise from empirical data, but aren't anticipated in advance (see Aisenbrey 2000). From a confirmatory point of view these not-anticipated sequences are regarded as deviation of a defined model and are not analyzed in more detail.
As an example figure 4 shows a typology of similar sequences as a result of optimal-matching analysis and cluster-analysis: Different colored squares symbolise different informational units, the succession of squares from left to right represent the sequence of visited informational units (i.e. the navigational sequence). Horizontal lines divide different clusters of sequences. Bracket 1 marks a cluster of similar navigational sequences. The cluster typical navigational pattern is marked by digit 2. Digit 3 marks a sequence which differs from sequence 2 only by one informational unit at the beginning of the sequence. By adding this informational unit at the beginning (insertion) the result will be the typical navigational pattern of this cluster. From the point of view of optimal-matching, these two sequences (digit 2 and digit 3) are similar, because only two operations are necessarily to align theses sequences. Digit 5 marks a navigational pattern that differs from the cluster typical navigational pattern only by one additional informational unit at the end of the sequence. From an optimal-matching point of view both navigational patterns are similar because only one operation (deletion) is necessary to align these sequences. Digit 4 marks a navigational pattern that differs from the cluster typical navigational pattern by two informational units at the second position and at the end of the sequence.  From the point of view of optimal-matching these two patterns are similar, because only to operations (deletion) are necessary for alignment.
Navigation as autodidactics
According to Meder (1997, 2006) the exploratory navigational process as the linear unfolding of a non-linear learning environment can be interpreted as autodidactic acting, i.e. the learner controls the didactic process. Whereas in the discussion of self-directed learning the question of spatial and temporal control is dominantly focused (see Brinkmann 2000), the term autodidactic stresses the selection of a learning path as the succession of selected informational units. Introducing the concept of autodidactics, Meder refers to the work of Richard Hönigswald (1927) who defines didactics in a systematic-philosophical perspective as the transformation of  meaning into time: meaning is always understood in a multi-relational, non-linear way and therefore posses no specific temporal structure in itself. For the purpose of trans-generational transmission, meaning is in need to be transformed into a temporal structure, in the temporal structure of teaching and learning, in the temporal structure of acting in general. This understanding of didactics - as the process of transforming meaning in time - can be illustrated by the scheduling of a lesson. First a teacher acts issue oriented and conducts an analysis of the specific content (meaning), its structure and its relations. Second in a following process analysis the teachers creates a precise lesson plan as a sequence of teaching: How to start, what to do then, how to go on... how to end. This precis succession within the lesson is always structured temporally i.e. linear. It aims at the most adequate and suitable succession and way of teaching a subject to a group of learners. In short the main focus of didactics as a theory of action is the translation of spatial figures into temporal figures. The inverse process of didactics can be referred to as autodidactics, i.e. the translation of temporal figures into spatial figures. Whereas didactics stresses the teacher perspective, autodidactis stresses the perspective of an exploratory learner and the process of learning. In regard to navigation in online learning environments autodidactics means that learners can make their own decision about the translation, and at the same time are forced to make these decisions. Therefore a specific knowledge of one's own learning process and learning strategies is required. This process of autodidactic practice is very complex and challenging and is supported by a specific arrangement of the learning environment to support this transformation and learning process. In short: By unfolding a non-linear hypertext an sequential navigational path is established. Learners acquire knowledge by developing a non-linear mental model of an specific issue based on their temporal-linear navigational path (see Meder 2006). That is one reason why navigation in hypertextual online environments  is  a complex and challenging task (see Iske 2002).
Results and outlook
The initial point of this proposal is the methodological question of how to analyze navigational processes. The answer is based on a methodology using levenshtein-distance and cluster analysis in order to group similar navigational sequences. By this hypotheses of navigational paths and their effects are becoming object of empirical educational research. The analysis of sequenced logdata within the scope of optimal-matching starts at a point, where the analysis of aggregated logdata ends: the navigational path as a sequence. In doing so a huge quantity of sequences can be analyzed both containing a huge quantity of elements and different quantities of different elements. Moreover the present and dominant focus on the result of e-learning can be put into perspective. This focusing on the outcome of navigational processes and at the same time suppressing of the whole process is dissatisfactory from a pedagogical point of view: processes of learning and formation are a fundamental topic of pedagogy and knowledge about the processes allows a multitude of pedagogical practices and interventions, i.e. the  pedagogical design of an online learning environment and the support of learners. In general the analysis of e-learning processes by means of optimal-matching refers to the heart of didactics, which analyses the empirical transformation of spatial figures into temporal figures (didactics) as well as the transformation of temporal figures in spatial figures (autodidactics) and at the same time reflects these processes in regard to appropriateness and alternative possibilities (see Meder 2003). In particular hypertext as the fundamental technology of online learning environments implies a radical structural change, where existing processes of transformation are up for discussion. Analyzing navigational processes in an online learning environment which is based on the ontology of Web-Didatics (Meder 2006) about 1600 navigational sequences including about 4600 informational units where analyzed. As a result specific navigational patterns and structures were identified, i.e. linear patterns of „exploration“ and „examination“, as well as non-linear patterns of direct and selective navigation. These patterns as specific strategies can be interpreted as „focused on explanation“, „focused on example“ and „focused on test“. Besides linear and non-linear navigational patterns the focusing of specific dominant elements is identifiable, i.e. in terms of specific elements who are missing within the sequence. Besides this specific patterns especially the diversity and plurality of empirical navigational paths become apparent. This diversity and plurality can be interpreted as a specific quality indicator of the analyzed learning environment: From a conceptional and pragmatic point of view the learning environment has the ability to represent a multiplicity of different navigational sequences and different navigational patterns and therefore provides didactical plurality. The described approach makes a contribution to the development of quality in e-learning focusing the process perspective which refers to the relation of learner, learning environment and content of learning. Knowledge of navigational processes can be considered as the precondition of detailed personal or digital feedback and at the same time as the foundation of strategies to micro-adaptation (see Leutner 1992). Especially new technological development like web 2.0, social software and social navigation promise new and varied ways of supporting conducive feedback. In order to identify pedagogical patterns a deductive and a inductive approach are differentiated (see Brouns et al. 2005): Following the deductive approach patterns are developed by experts (see Instructional Design, Reigeluth 1999). Following the inductive approach the didactical structure of existing online courses are analyzed in order to identify and extract pedagogical patterns. The overall potential of analyzing navigational sequences by means of optimal matching is located in the inductive approach: Thereby the inductive approach can be expanded to the analysis of patterns in empirical navigational processes in hypermedia online learning environments. The analytic potential of the described approach for analyzing sequences in the domain of e-learning can be clarified with regard to the discussion of learning design patterns. In the context of standardization in e-learning and notably in the context of the IMS Global Learning Consortium the identification of „Learning Design Patterns“ in order to conceptual design e-learning environments gets increasingly important. Following Koper (2006) this is a central challenge for research: „The idea of learning design patterns and the possibility to recognise them automatically with pattern detection algorithms is a new field of work that is worthwhile to elaborate in future“ (Koper 2006). The overall aim of social navigation (see Dourish / Chalmers 1994; Höök / Benyon / Munro 2003) summarizes Dieberger (2003, p. 293-294) as follows: „Although many people may access an information system at the same time, most systems maintain the illusion of a dedicated resource and the only indication of a large number of users simultaneously accessing a system might be an unusually slow response time. [...] A goal of social navigation is to utilise information about other people's behavior for our own navigational decisions“. This utilisation of information about other people's navigational behavior can occur direct or indirect. Direct social navigation implies co-presence of users in online-learning-environments and is based on direct contact, whereas indirect social navigation is based on information about the navigation of other users in the learning environment, i.e. effective or attractive navigational sequences, areas of high or low usage. Concerning the conceptualization of indirect social navigation analyzing sequences in means of optimal matching has a great importance, because the navigational behavior of users can be included in the conception of indirect social navigation. 
Bibliography
Abbott, Andrew; Forrest, John: Optimal Matching Methods for Historical Sequences. Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 1986, 16, 3; p. 471-494.
Aisenbrey, Silke: Optimal Matching Analyse: Anwendungen in den Sozialwissenschaften. Leske und Budrich: Opladen, 2000.
Bergmann, Jörg; Meier, Christoph: Elektronische Prozessdaten und ihre Analyse. In (Flick, U.; Kardorff, E. von; Steinke, I., Hrsg.): Qualitative Forschung: Ein Handbuch. Reinbek: Rowohlt, 2000; p. 429-437.
Berners-Lee, Tim; Cailliau, Robert: WorldWideWeb: Proposal for a HyperText Project. <http://www.w3.org/Proposal.html>, 1990, (25.02.2007).
Brinkmann, Dieter (2000): Moderne Lernformen und Lerntechniken in der Erwachsenenbildung: Formen selbstgesteuerten Lernens. Inst. für Freizeitwissenschaft und Kulturarbeit (IFKA): Bielefeld.
Brouns, Francis / Koper, Rob / Manderveld, Jocelyn / Bruggen, Jan van / Sloep, Peter / Rosmalen, Peter van / Tattersall, Colin / Vogten, Hubert (2005): A first exploration of an inductive analysis approach for detecting learning design patterns. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 3.
Bush, Vannevar (1945): As we may think. Atlantic Monthly, 176, 1. p. 641-649.
Chan, Tak Wing (1995): Optimal Matching Analysis: A methodological note on studying career mobility. Work and Occupation, 4, p. 467-490.
Dieberger, Andreas (2003): Social Connotations of Space in the Design for Virtual Communities and Social Navigation. In: Höök, K. / Benyon, D. (Hg.): Designing Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach. London: Springer.
Dourish, P.; Chalmers, M. (1994): Running out of space: Models of information navigation. Short paper presented at HCI'94 (Glasgow, Scotland).
Engelbart, Douglas C. (1963): A Conceptual Framework for the Augmention of Man's Intellect. In: P. W. Howerton (Hg.): Vistas in Information Handling. Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books. p. 1-29.
Ehlers, Ulf-Daniel: Qualität beim eLearning. Der Lernende als Grundkategorie der Qualitätssicherung. In (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Erziehungswissenschaft, Hrsg.): MedienPädagogik – Onlinezeitschrift für Theorie und Praxis der Medienbildung. Ausgabe 01/2002. <http://www.medienpaed.com/02-1/ehlers1.pdf>, (25.02.2007).
Erzberger, Christian / Prein, Gerald (1997): Optimal-Matching-Technik: Ein Analyseverfahren zur Vergleichbarkeit und Ordnung individuell differenter Lebensverläufe. ZUMA-Nachrichten, p. 40, 21.
Erzberger, Christian: Sequenzmusteranalyse als fallorientierte Analysestrategie. In (Sackmann, R.; Wingens, M., Hrsg.): Strukturen des Lebenslaufs: Übergang - Sequenz - Verlauf. Weinheim: Juventa, 2001; p. 135-162.
Halpin, B. / Chan, T. W. (1998): Class Careers as Sequences: An Optimal Matching Analysis of Work-Life Histories. European Sociological Review, 17, 2. p. 119-144.
Hamming, R. W.: Error-Detecting and Error-Correcting. Bell System Technical Journal, 1950, 2; p. 147-160.
Hönigswald, Richard: Über die Grundlagen der Pädagogik: ein Beitrag zur Frage des pädagogischen Universitäts-Unterrichts. Reinhardt: München, 1927; 2., revised edition.
Höök, Kristina; Benyon, David; Munro, Alan J.: Designing Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach. Springer: London, 2003.
Iske, Stefan: Vernetztes Wissen: Hypertext-Strategien im Internet. Bertelsmann: Bielefeld, 2002.
Iske, Stefan; Swertz, Christian: Methodologische Fragen der Verwendung von Bild-, Ton- und Textdaten zur Navigationsanalyse. In (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Erziehungswissenschaft, Hrsg.): MedienPädagogik – Onlinezeitschrift für Theorie und Praxis der Medienbildung. Ausgabe 01/2005. <www.medienpaed.com/04-1/iske_swertz04-1.pdf>, (25.02.2007).
Koper, Rob (2006): Current Research in Learning Design. Educational Technology & Society, 9, 1. p. 13-22.
Kruskal, Joseph B. (1999): An overview of sequence comparison. In: Sankoff, D. / Kruskal, J. (Hg.): Time warps, string edits, and macromolecules: the theory and practice of sequence comparison. Stanford, California: CSLI. p. 1-44.
Kuhlen, Rainer: Hypertext. Ein nicht-lineares Medium zwischen Buch und Wissensbank. Springer: Berlin, 1991.
Landow, George P.: Hypertext 2.0: Hypertext - the convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press: Baltimore, 1997.
Leutner, Detlev: Adaptive Lehrsysteme - instruktionspsychologische Grundlagen und experimentelle Analysen. Weinheim: Psychologie-Verlags-Union, 1992.
Levenshtein, Vladimir. I.: Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Cybernetics and Control Theory, 1966, 10, 8; p. 707-710. 
Meder, Norbert (1997): Die Abbildung von Sachverhalten in die Zeit. In: Schmiedt-Kowarzik, W. (Hg.): Erkennen - Monas - Sprache. Internationales Richard-Hönigswald-Symposium. Kassel 1995. Würzburg: Königshausen Neumann. p. 277-289.
Meder, Norbert Grundlagen zu einer Theorie der Didaktik. In (Schlüter, Anne, Hrsg.): Aktuelles und Querliegendes zur Didaktik und Curriculumentwicklung. Bielefeld: Janus Presse, 2003; p. 34-47.
Meder, Norbert: Web-Didaktik: eine neue Didaktik webbasierten vernetzten Lernens. Bertelsmann: Bielefeld, 2006.
Nelson, Theodor (1965): Complex information processing: a file structure for the complex, changing and the indeterminate. In: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM): Proceedings of the 1965 20th national conference. Cleveland, Ohio, United States. p. 84-100.
Priemer, Burkhard: Logfile-Analysen: Möglichkeiten und Grenzen ihrer Nutzung bei Untersuchungen zur Mensch-Maschine-Interaktion. In (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Erziehungswissenschaft, Hrsg.): MedienPädagogik – Onlinezeitschrift für Theorie und Praxis der Medienbildung, 2004 . <http://www.medienpaed.com/04-1/priemer1.pdf>, (25.02.2007).
Reigeluth, Charles M. (1999): Instructional-Design Theories and Models. A New Paradigm of Instructional Theory. Volume II. Hillsdale: Lawrence Earlbaum.
Sankoff, D.; Kruskal, J. (Hrsg.): Time warps, string edits, and macromolecules: the theory and practice of sequence comparison. Stanford: CSLI., 2. edition.
Webb, Eugene John;Campbell, Donald T.;Schwartz, Richard D.; Sechrest, Lee (1966): Unobtrusive measures: nonreactive research in the social sciences. Rand McNally: Chicago.

Figures
 Figure 1: Comparison of sequence 1 and 2
 
 Figure 2: Comparison of sequence 1 and 3
 
 Figure 3: Comparison of sequence 2 and 3
 




Figure  4: Grouping of similar navigational sequences by means of optimal-matching 



